feat: Add CloudQuery integration (ECOINT-11) (#2451)
DataDog/integrations-extras: cloudquery/README.md

# CloudQuery

![datadog-integration][1]

## Overview

[CloudQuery][2] is an [open-source][3], high-performance data integration framework built for developers, with support for a wide range of plugins.

CloudQuery extracts, transforms, and loads configuration from cloud APIs to a variety of supported destinations such as databases, data lakes, or streaming platforms for further analysis.

## Setup

### Installation

Install the Datadog Agent version >=6.48.0 or >=7.48.0, which supports ingesting OpenTelemetry traces, metrics, and logs from CloudQuery.
Alternatively, you can use OpenTelemetry Collector and Datadog Exporter as described below.

### Configuration

CloudQuery supports [OpenTelemetry][5] traces, metrics and logs out of the box.

> There are multiple ways to configure OpenTelemetry with Datadog. We'll show only a subset of them here, and you can find more information [in the Datadog docs][6].

Author: Great suggestion, wasn't sure if I can use more nesting for the headers (e.g. `####`)

```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      http:
        endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318"

processors:
  batch/datadog:
    send_batch_max_size: 1000
    send_batch_size: 100
    timeout: 10s

exporters:
  datadog:
    api:
      site: ${env:DATADOG_SITE}
      key: ${env:DATADOG_API_KEY}

service:
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch/datadog]
      exporters: [datadog]
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch/datadog]
      exporters: [datadog]
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch/datadog]
      exporters: [datadog]
```

Then run the collector with the following command (replacing `DATADOG_SITE` and `DATADOG_API_KEY` with your own values):

```bash
docker run \
    -p 4318:4318 \
    -e DATADOG_SITE=$DATADOG_SITE \
    -e DATADOG_API_KEY=$DATADOG_API_KEY \
    --hostname $(hostname) \
    -v $(pwd)/otel_collector_config.yaml:/etc/otelcol-contrib/config.yaml \
    otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.104.0
```

> For additional ways to run the collector, please refer to the [official documentation][7].

> - Direct OTEL Ingestion by the Datadog Agent via a configuration file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Datadog Agent OTEL ingestion through a configuration file
```

> [Locate][8] your `datadog.yaml` file and add the following configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Locate your [`datadog.yaml` Agent configuration file][8] and add the following configuration:
```

```yaml
otlp_config:
  receiver:
    protocols:
      http:
        endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4318
  logs:
    enabled: true
logs_enabled: true
```

> [Restart][9] the Datadog agent for the change to take effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Restart][9] the Datadog agent for the change to take effect.
```

> - Direct OTEL ingestion by the Datadog Agent via environment variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Datadog Agent OTEL ingestion through environment variables
```

> Pass the `DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT` environment variable to the Datadog agent with a value of `0.0.0.0:4318`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Pass the `DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT` environment variable to the Datadog Agent with a value of `0.0.0.0:4318`.
```

> If you're using Docker compose, you can find an example below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using Docker compose, see the example below:
```

```yaml
version: "3.0"
services:
  agent:
    image: gcr.io/datadoghq/agent:7
    volumes:
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro
      - /proc/:/host/proc/:ro
      - /sys/fs/cgroup/:/host/sys/fs/cgroup:ro
    environment:
      DD_API_KEY: redacted
      DD_SITE: "datadoghq.eu"
      DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT: "0.0.0.0:4318"
      DD_LOGS_ENABLED: "true"
      DD_OTLP_CONFIG_LOGS_ENABLED: "true"
    ports:
      - "4318:4318"
```

> [Restart][10] the Datadog agent for the change to take effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Restart][9] the Datadog agent for the change to take effect.
```

> > For additional ways to configure the Datadog agent, please refer to the [official documentation][11].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more ways to configure the Datadog Agent, see [OTLP Ingestion by the Datadog Agent][11].
```

> Once you have the agent or collector ready, you can specify the endpoint in the source spec:

Reviewer: Is this optional? If not, recommend moving this to each configuration as the final step. For example: 
```
1. Restart the Datadog agent for the change to take effect.
2. After you have the Agent ready, specify the endpoint in the source spec:
```
```suggestion
After you have the Agent or collector ready, specify the endpoint in the source spec:
```

Author: This is required, good suggestion 👍

```yaml
kind: source
spec:
  name: "aws"
  path: "cloudquery/aws"
  registry: "cloudquery"
  version: "VERSION_SOURCE_AWS"
  tables: ["aws_s3_buckets"]
  destinations: ["postgresql"]
  otel_endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318"
  otel_endpoint_insecure: true
  spec:
```

### Validation

Run `cloudquery sync spec.yml`.

> Once ingestion starts you should be able to start seeing the traces in Datadog under APM->Traces->Explorer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After ingestion starts, you should start seeing the traces in the Datadog [**APM Traces Explorer**][13].
```

> You should see metrics and logs in the respective sections of the Datadog UI as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also validate metrics and logs in the [**Metrics Summary**][14] and [**Log Explorer**][15].
```

## Data Collected

### Metrics

The CloudQuery does not include any metrics.

### Service Checks

The CloudQuery does not include any service checks.

### Events

The CloudQuery does not include any events.

## Uninstallation

If you use the OpenTelemetry collector, you can stop it by running `docker stop <container_id>`.

> IF you use the Datadog agent, remove the configuration or environment variables you added and [restart][10] the agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use the Datadog Agent, remove the configuration or environment variables you added and [restart][9] the agent.
```

Finally, delete the dashboard from your Datadog account.

## Support

> Need help? [Contact us][4].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For support, contact [CloudQuery][4].
```

[1]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/integrations-extras/master/cloudquery/images/cloudquery_logo_png_dark_background.png
[2]: https://www.cloudquery.io/
[3]: https://github.com/cloudquery/cloudquery
[4]: https://www.cloudquery.io/pricing
[5]: https://opentelemetry.io/
[6]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/opentelemetry/
[7]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/opentelemetry/collector_exporter/deployment#running-the-collector
[8]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/configuration/agent-configuration-files/
[9]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/configuration/agent-commands/#restart-the-agent

> [10]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/configuration/agent-commands/#restart-the-agent

Reviewer: duplicate

```suggestion
```

#### OpenTelemetry collector

To configure an OpenTelemetry collector with Datadog:

1. Create a configuration file. For example, create an `otel_collector_config.yaml` file with the content below:

```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      http:
        endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318"

processors:
  batch/datadog:
    send_batch_max_size: 1000
    send_batch_size: 100
    timeout: 10s

exporters:
  datadog:
    api:
      site: ${env:DATADOG_SITE}
      key: ${env:DATADOG_API_KEY}

service:
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch/datadog]
      exporters: [datadog]
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch/datadog]
      exporters: [datadog]
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch/datadog]
      exporters: [datadog]
```

2. Run the collector with the following command (replace `DATADOG_SITE` and `DATADOG_API_KEY` with your own values):

```bash
docker run \
    -p 4318:4318 \
    -e DATADOG_SITE=$DATADOG_SITE \
    -e DATADOG_API_KEY=$DATADOG_API_KEY \
    --hostname $(hostname) \
    -v $(pwd)/otel_collector_config.yaml:/etc/otelcol-contrib/config.yaml \
    otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.104.0
```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
3. After you have the collector ready, specify the endpoint in the source spec:

```yaml
kind: source
spec:
  name: "aws"
  path: "cloudquery/aws"
  registry: "cloudquery"
  version: "VERSION_SOURCE_AWS"
  tables: ["aws_s3_buckets"]
  destinations: ["postgresql"]
  otel_endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318"
  otel_endpoint_insecure: true
  spec:
```

````

For additional ways to run the collector, see [OpenTelemetry Deployment][7].

#### Datadog Agent OTEL ingestion through a configuration file

1. Locate your [`datadog.yaml` Agent configuration file][8] and add the following configuration:

```yaml
otlp_config:
  receiver:
    protocols:
      http:
        endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4318
  logs:
    enabled: true
logs_enabled: true
```

> 2. [Restart][9] the Datadog agent for the change to take effect.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
2. [Restart][9] the Datadog agent for the change to take effect.

3. After you have the Agent ready, specify the endpoint in the source spec:

```yaml
kind: source
spec:
  name: "aws"
  path: "cloudquery/aws"
  registry: "cloudquery"
  version: "VERSION_SOURCE_AWS"
  tables: ["aws_s3_buckets"]
  destinations: ["postgresql"]
  otel_endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318"
  otel_endpoint_insecure: true
  spec:
```
````

#### Datadog Agent OTEL ingestion through environment variables

1. Pass the `DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT` environment variable to the Datadog Agent with a value of `0.0.0.0:4318`.
If you're using Docker compose, see the example below:

```yaml
version: "3.0"
services:
  agent:
    image: gcr.io/datadoghq/agent:7
    volumes:
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro
      - /proc/:/host/proc/:ro
      - /sys/fs/cgroup/:/host/sys/fs/cgroup:ro
    environment:
      DD_API_KEY: redacted
      DD_SITE: "datadoghq.eu"
      DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT: "0.0.0.0:4318"
      DD_LOGS_ENABLED: "true"
      DD_OTLP_CONFIG_LOGS_ENABLED: "true"
    ports:
      - "4318:4318"
```

> 2. [Restart][9] the Datadog agent for the change to take effect.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
2. [Restart][9] the Datadog agent for the change to take effect.

3. After you have the Agent ready, specify the endpoint in the source spec:
```yaml
kind: source
spec:
  name: "aws"
  path: "cloudquery/aws"
  registry: "cloudquery"
  version: "VERSION_SOURCE_AWS"
  tables: ["aws_s3_buckets"]
  destinations: ["postgresql"]
  otel_endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318"
  otel_endpoint_insecure: true
  spec:
```
````

For more ways to configure the Datadog Agent, see [OTLP Ingestion by the Datadog Agent][10].

> After you have the Agent or collector ready, specify the endpoint in the source spec:
> 
> ```yaml
> kind: source
> spec:
>   name: "aws"
>   path: "cloudquery/aws"
>   registry: "cloudquery"
>   version: "VERSION_SOURCE_AWS"
>   tables: ["aws_s3_buckets"]
>   destinations: ["postgresql"]
>   otel_endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318"
>   otel_endpoint_insecure: true
>   spec:
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
